Doc/library/shutil.rst, before:

:mod:`shutil` --- High-level file operations
============================================

.. module:: shutil
   :synopsis: High-level file operations, including copying.
.. sectionauthor:: Fred L. Drake, Jr. <fdrake@acm.org>
.. partly based on the docstrings

.. index::
   single: file; copying
   single: copying files

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/shutil.py`

--------------

The :mod:`shutil` module offers a number of high-level operations on files and
collections of files.  In particular, functions are provided  which support file
copying and removal. For operations on individual files, see also the
:mod:`os` module.

.. warning::

   Even the higher-level file copying functions (:func:`copy`, :func:`copy2`)
   cannot copy all file metadata.

   On POSIX platforms, this means that file owner and group are lost as well
   as ACLs.  On Mac OS, the resource fork and other metadata are not used.
   This means that resources will be lost and file type and creator codes will
   not be correct. On Windows, file owners, ACLs and alternate data streams
   are not copied.


Directory and files operations
------------------------------

.. function:: copyfileobj(fsrc, fdst[, length])

   Copy the contents of the file-like object *fsrc* to the file-like object *fdst*.
   The integer *length*, if given, is the buffer size. In particular, a negative
   *length* value means to copy the data without looping over the source data in
   chunks; by default the data is read in chunks to avoid uncontrolled memory
   consumption. Note that if the current file position of the *fsrc* object is not
   0, only the contents from the current file position to the end of the file will
   be copied.


.. function:: copyfile(src, dst)

   Copy the contents (no metadata) of the file named *src* to a file named *dst*.
   *dst* must be the complete target file name; look at :func:`copy` for a copy that
   accepts a target directory path.  If *src* and *dst* are the same files,
   :exc:`Error` is raised.
   The destination location must be writable; otherwise,  an :exc:`IOError` exception
   will be raised. If *dst* already exists, it will be replaced.   Special files
   such as character or block devices and pipes cannot be copied with this
   function.  *src* and *dst* are path names given as strings.


.. function:: copymode(src, dst)

   Copy the permission bits from *src* to *dst*.  The file contents, owner, and
   group are unaffected.  *src* and *dst* are path names given as strings.


.. function:: copystat(src, dst)

   Copy the permission bits, last access time, last modification time, and flags
   from *src* to *dst*.  The file contents, owner, and group are unaffected.  *src*
   and *dst* are path names given as strings.


.. function:: copy(src, dst)

   Copy the file *src* to the file or directory *dst*.  If *dst* is a directory, a
   file with the same basename as *src*  is created (or overwritten) in the
   directory specified.  Permission bits are copied.  *src* and *dst* are path
   names given as strings.


.. function:: copy2(src, dst)

   Similar to :func:`copy`, but metadata is copied as well -- in fact, this is just
   :func:`copy` followed by :func:`copystat`.  This is similar to the
   Unix command :program:`cp -p`.


.. function:: ignore_patterns(\*patterns)

   This factory function creates a function that can be used as a callable for
   :func:`copytree`\'s *ignore* argument, ignoring files and directories that
   match one of the glob-style *patterns* provided.  See the example below.


.. function:: copytree(src, dst, symlinks=False, ignore=None, copy_function=copy2, ignore_dangling_symlinks=False)

   Recursively copy an entire directory tree rooted at *src*.  The destination
   directory, named by *dst*, must not already exist; it will be created as well
   as missing parent directories.  Permissions and times of directories are
   copied with :func:`copystat`, individual files are copied using
   :func:`copy2`.

   If *symlinks* is true, symbolic links in the source tree are represented as
   symbolic links in the new tree; if false or omitted, the contents of the
   linked files are copied to the new tree.

   When *symlinks* is false, if the file pointed by the symlink doesn't
   exist, a exception will be added in the list of errors raised in
   a :exc:`Error` exception at the end of the copy process.
   You can set the optional *ignore_dangling_symlinks* flag to true if you
   want to silence this exception. Notice that this option has no effect
   on platforms that don't support :func:`os.symlink`.

   If *ignore* is given, it must be a callable that will receive as its
   arguments the directory being visited by :func:`copytree`, and a list of its
   contents, as returned by :func:`os.listdir`.  Since :func:`copytree` is
   called recursively, the *ignore* callable will be called once for each
   directory that is copied.  The callable must return a sequence of directory
   and file names relative to the current directory (i.e. a subset of the items
   in its second argument); these names will then be ignored in the copy
   process.  :func:`ignore_patterns` can be used to create such a callable that
   ignores names based on glob-style patterns.

   If exception(s) occur, an :exc:`Error` is raised with a list of reasons.

   If *copy_function* is given, it must be a callable that will be used
   to copy each file. It will be called with the source path and the
   destination path as arguments. By default, :func:`copy2` is used, but any
   function that supports the same signature (like :func:`copy`) can be used.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.2
      Added the *copy_function* argument to be able to provide a custom copy
      function.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.2
      Added the *ignore_dangling_symlinks* argument to silent dangling symlinks
      errors when *symlinks* is false.


.. function:: rmtree(path, ignore_errors=False, onerror=None)

   .. index:: single: directory; deleting

   Delete an entire directory tree; *path* must point to a directory (but not a
   symbolic link to a directory).  If *ignore_errors* is true, errors resulting
   from failed removals will be ignored; if false or omitted, such errors are
   handled by calling a handler specified by *onerror* or, if that is omitted,
   they raise an exception.

   If *onerror* is provided, it must be a callable that accepts three
   parameters: *function*, *path*, and *excinfo*. The first parameter,
   *function*, is the function which raised the exception; it will be
   :func:`os.path.islink`, :func:`os.listdir`, :func:`os.remove` or
   :func:`os.rmdir`.  The second parameter, *path*, will be the path name passed
   to *function*.  The third parameter, *excinfo*, will be the exception
   information return by :func:`sys.exc_info`.  Exceptions raised by *onerror*
   will not be caught.


.. function:: move(src, dst)

   Recursively move a file or directory to another location.

   If the destination is on the current filesystem, then simply use rename.
   Otherwise, copy src (with :func:`copy2`) to the dst and then remove src.


.. exception:: Error

   This exception collects exceptions that raised during a multi-file operation. For
   :func:`copytree`, the exception argument is a list of 3-tuples (*srcname*,
   *dstname*, *exception*).


.. _shutil-example:

copytree example
::::::::::::::::

This example is the implementation of the :func:`copytree` function, described
above, with the docstring omitted.  It demonstrates many of the other functions
provided by this module. ::

   def copytree(src, dst, symlinks=False):
       names = os.listdir(src)
       os.makedirs(dst)
       errors = []
       for name in names:
           srcname = os.path.join(src, name)
           dstname = os.path.join(dst, name)
           try:
               if symlinks and os.path.islink(srcname):
                   linkto = os.readlink(srcname)
                   os.symlink(linkto, dstname)
               elif os.path.isdir(srcname):
                   copytree(srcname, dstname, symlinks)
               else:
                   copy2(srcname, dstname)
               # XXX What about devices, sockets etc.?
           except (IOError, os.error) as why:
               errors.append((srcname, dstname, str(why)))
           # catch the Error from the recursive copytree so that we can
           # continue with other files
           except Error as err:
               errors.extend(err.args[0])
       try:
           copystat(src, dst)
       except WindowsError:
           # can't copy file access times on Windows
           pass
       except OSError as why:
           errors.extend((src, dst, str(why)))
       if errors:
           raise Error(errors)

Another example that uses the :func:`ignore_patterns` helper::

   from shutil import copytree, ignore_patterns

   copytree(source, destination, ignore=ignore_patterns('*.pyc', 'tmp*'))

This will copy everything except ``.pyc`` files and files or directories whose
name starts with ``tmp``.

Another example that uses the *ignore* argument to add a logging call::

   from shutil import copytree
   import logging

   def _logpath(path, names):
       logging.info('Working in %s' % path)
       return []   # nothing will be ignored

   copytree(source, destination, ignore=_logpath)


.. _archiving-operations:

Archiving operations
--------------------

.. function:: make_archive(base_name, format, [root_dir, [base_dir, [verbose, [dry_run, [owner, [group, [logger]]]]]]])

   Create an archive file (such as zip or tar) and return its name.

   *base_name* is the name of the file to create, including the path, minus
   any format-specific extension. *format* is the archive format: one of
   "zip", "tar", "bztar" (if the :mod:`bz2` module is available) or "gztar".

   *root_dir* is a directory that will be the root directory of the
   archive; for example, we typically chdir into *root_dir* before creating the
   archive.

   *base_dir* is the directory where we start archiving from;
   i.e. *base_dir* will be the common prefix of all files and
   directories in the archive.

   *root_dir* and *base_dir* both default to the current directory.

   *owner* and *group* are used when creating a tar archive. By default,
   uses the current owner and group.

   *logger* is an instance of :class:`logging.Logger`.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: get_archive_formats()

   Returns a list of supported formats for archiving.
   Each element of the returned sequence is a tuple ``(name, description)``

   By default :mod:`shutil` provides these formats:

   - *gztar*: gzip'ed tar-file
   - *bztar*: bzip2'ed tar-file (if the :mod:`bz2` module is available.)
   - *tar*: uncompressed tar file
   - *zip*: ZIP file

   You can register new formats or provide your own archiver for any existing
   formats, by using :func:`register_archive_format`.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: register_archive_format(name, function, [extra_args, [description]])

   Registers an archiver for the format *name*. *function* is a callable that
   will be used to invoke the archiver.

   If given, *extra_args* is a sequence of ``(name, value)`` pairs that will be
   used as extra keywords arguments when the archiver callable is used.

   *description* is used by :func:`get_archive_formats` which returns the
   list of archivers. Defaults to an empty list.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: unregister_archive_format(name)

   Remove the archive format *name* from the list of supported formats.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: unpack_archive(filename[, extract_dir[, format]])

   Unpack an archive. *filename* is the full path of the archive.

   *extract_dir* is the name of the target directory where the archive is
   unpacked. If not provided, the current working directory is used.

   *format* is the archive format: one of "zip", "tar", or "gztar". Or any
   other format registered with :func:`register_unpack_format`. If not
   provided, :func:`unpack_archive` will use the archive file name extension
   and see if an unpacker was registered for that extension. In case none is
   found, a :exc:`ValueError` is raised.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: register_unpack_format(name, extensions, function[, extra_args[, description]])

   Registers an unpack format. *name* is the name of the format and
   *extensions* is a list of extensions corresponding to the format, like
   ``.zip`` for Zip files.

   *function* is the callable that will be used to unpack archives. The
   callable will receive the path of the archive, followed by the directory
   the archive must be extracted to.

   When provided, *extra_args* is a sequence of ``(name, value)`` tuples that
   will be passed as keywords arguments to the callable.

   *description* can be provided to describe the format, and will be returned
   by the :func:`get_unpack_formats` function.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: unregister_unpack_format(name)

   Unregister an unpack format. *name* is the name of the format.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: get_unpack_formats()

   Return a list of all registered formats for unpacking.
   Each element of the returned sequence is a tuple
   ``(name, extensions, description)``.

   By default :mod:`shutil` provides these formats:

   - *gztar*: gzip'ed tar-file
   - *bztar*: bzip2'ed tar-file (if the :mod:`bz2` module is available.)
   - *tar*: uncompressed tar file
   - *zip*: ZIP file

   You can register new formats or provide your own unpacker for any existing
   formats, by using :func:`register_unpack_format`.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2



Archiving example
:::::::::::::::::

In this example, we create a gzip'ed tar-file archive containing all files
found in the :file:`.ssh` directory of the user::

    >>> from shutil import make_archive
    >>> import os
    >>> archive_name = os.path.expanduser(os.path.join('~', 'myarchive'))
    >>> root_dir = os.path.expanduser(os.path.join('~', '.ssh'))
    >>> make_archive(archive_name, 'gztar', root_dir)
    '/Users/tarek/myarchive.tar.gz'

The resulting archive contains::

    $ tar -tzvf /Users/tarek/myarchive.tar.gz
    drwx------ tarek/staff       0 2010-02-01 16:23:40 ./
    -rw-r--r-- tarek/staff     609 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./authorized_keys
    -rwxr-xr-x tarek/staff      65 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./config
    -rwx------ tarek/staff     668 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_dsa
    -rwxr-xr-x tarek/staff     609 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_dsa.pub
    -rw------- tarek/staff    1675 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_rsa
    -rw-r--r-- tarek/staff     397 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_rsa.pub
    -rw-r--r-- tarek/staff   37192 2010-02-06 18:23:10 ./known_hosts

Commit message:

Fix closes issue12577 - clarify shutil.move documentation. Patch suggestion by Catalin Iacob

Doc/library/shutil.rst, after:

:mod:`shutil` --- High-level file operations
============================================

.. module:: shutil
   :synopsis: High-level file operations, including copying.
.. sectionauthor:: Fred L. Drake, Jr. <fdrake@acm.org>
.. partly based on the docstrings

.. index::
   single: file; copying
   single: copying files

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/shutil.py`

--------------

The :mod:`shutil` module offers a number of high-level operations on files and
collections of files.  In particular, functions are provided  which support file
copying and removal. For operations on individual files, see also the
:mod:`os` module.

.. warning::

   Even the higher-level file copying functions (:func:`copy`, :func:`copy2`)
   cannot copy all file metadata.

   On POSIX platforms, this means that file owner and group are lost as well
   as ACLs.  On Mac OS, the resource fork and other metadata are not used.
   This means that resources will be lost and file type and creator codes will
   not be correct. On Windows, file owners, ACLs and alternate data streams
   are not copied.


Directory and files operations
------------------------------

.. function:: copyfileobj(fsrc, fdst[, length])

   Copy the contents of the file-like object *fsrc* to the file-like object *fdst*.
   The integer *length*, if given, is the buffer size. In particular, a negative
   *length* value means to copy the data without looping over the source data in
   chunks; by default the data is read in chunks to avoid uncontrolled memory
   consumption. Note that if the current file position of the *fsrc* object is not
   0, only the contents from the current file position to the end of the file will
   be copied.


.. function:: copyfile(src, dst)

   Copy the contents (no metadata) of the file named *src* to a file named *dst*.
   *dst* must be the complete target file name; look at :func:`copy` for a copy that
   accepts a target directory path.  If *src* and *dst* are the same files,
   :exc:`Error` is raised.
   The destination location must be writable; otherwise,  an :exc:`IOError` exception
   will be raised. If *dst* already exists, it will be replaced.   Special files
   such as character or block devices and pipes cannot be copied with this
   function.  *src* and *dst* are path names given as strings.


.. function:: copymode(src, dst)

   Copy the permission bits from *src* to *dst*.  The file contents, owner, and
   group are unaffected.  *src* and *dst* are path names given as strings.


.. function:: copystat(src, dst)

   Copy the permission bits, last access time, last modification time, and flags
   from *src* to *dst*.  The file contents, owner, and group are unaffected.  *src*
   and *dst* are path names given as strings.


.. function:: copy(src, dst)

   Copy the file *src* to the file or directory *dst*.  If *dst* is a directory, a
   file with the same basename as *src*  is created (or overwritten) in the
   directory specified.  Permission bits are copied.  *src* and *dst* are path
   names given as strings.


.. function:: copy2(src, dst)

   Similar to :func:`copy`, but metadata is copied as well -- in fact, this is just
   :func:`copy` followed by :func:`copystat`.  This is similar to the
   Unix command :program:`cp -p`.


.. function:: ignore_patterns(\*patterns)

   This factory function creates a function that can be used as a callable for
   :func:`copytree`\'s *ignore* argument, ignoring files and directories that
   match one of the glob-style *patterns* provided.  See the example below.


.. function:: copytree(src, dst, symlinks=False, ignore=None, copy_function=copy2, ignore_dangling_symlinks=False)

   Recursively copy an entire directory tree rooted at *src*.  The destination
   directory, named by *dst*, must not already exist; it will be created as well
   as missing parent directories.  Permissions and times of directories are
   copied with :func:`copystat`, individual files are copied using
   :func:`copy2`.

   If *symlinks* is true, symbolic links in the source tree are represented as
   symbolic links in the new tree; if false or omitted, the contents of the
   linked files are copied to the new tree.

   When *symlinks* is false, if the file pointed by the symlink doesn't
   exist, a exception will be added in the list of errors raised in
   a :exc:`Error` exception at the end of the copy process.
   You can set the optional *ignore_dangling_symlinks* flag to true if you
   want to silence this exception. Notice that this option has no effect
   on platforms that don't support :func:`os.symlink`.

   If *ignore* is given, it must be a callable that will receive as its
   arguments the directory being visited by :func:`copytree`, and a list of its
   contents, as returned by :func:`os.listdir`.  Since :func:`copytree` is
   called recursively, the *ignore* callable will be called once for each
   directory that is copied.  The callable must return a sequence of directory
   and file names relative to the current directory (i.e. a subset of the items
   in its second argument); these names will then be ignored in the copy
   process.  :func:`ignore_patterns` can be used to create such a callable that
   ignores names based on glob-style patterns.

   If exception(s) occur, an :exc:`Error` is raised with a list of reasons.

   If *copy_function* is given, it must be a callable that will be used
   to copy each file. It will be called with the source path and the
   destination path as arguments. By default, :func:`copy2` is used, but any
   function that supports the same signature (like :func:`copy`) can be used.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.2
      Added the *copy_function* argument to be able to provide a custom copy
      function.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.2
      Added the *ignore_dangling_symlinks* argument to silent dangling symlinks
      errors when *symlinks* is false.


.. function:: rmtree(path, ignore_errors=False, onerror=None)

   .. index:: single: directory; deleting

   Delete an entire directory tree; *path* must point to a directory (but not a
   symbolic link to a directory).  If *ignore_errors* is true, errors resulting
   from failed removals will be ignored; if false or omitted, such errors are
   handled by calling a handler specified by *onerror* or, if that is omitted,
   they raise an exception.

   If *onerror* is provided, it must be a callable that accepts three
   parameters: *function*, *path*, and *excinfo*. The first parameter,
   *function*, is the function which raised the exception; it will be
   :func:`os.path.islink`, :func:`os.listdir`, :func:`os.remove` or
   :func:`os.rmdir`.  The second parameter, *path*, will be the path name passed
   to *function*.  The third parameter, *excinfo*, will be the exception
   information return by :func:`sys.exc_info`.  Exceptions raised by *onerror*
   will not be caught.


.. function:: move(src, dst)

   Recursively move a file or directory to another location.

   Uses :func:`os.rename` to perform the move. If it fails, for reasons such as
   when *src* and *dst* are on different filesystems or in case of windows where
   rename is not supported when *dst* exists, fallback to copying *src* (with
   :func:`copy2`) to the *dst* and then remove *src*.


.. exception:: Error

   This exception collects exceptions that raised during a multi-file operation. For
   :func:`copytree`, the exception argument is a list of 3-tuples (*srcname*,
   *dstname*, *exception*).


.. _shutil-example:

copytree example
::::::::::::::::

This example is the implementation of the :func:`copytree` function, described
above, with the docstring omitted.  It demonstrates many of the other functions
provided by this module. ::

   def copytree(src, dst, symlinks=False):
       names = os.listdir(src)
       os.makedirs(dst)
       errors = []
       for name in names:
           srcname = os.path.join(src, name)
           dstname = os.path.join(dst, name)
           try:
               if symlinks and os.path.islink(srcname):
                   linkto = os.readlink(srcname)
                   os.symlink(linkto, dstname)
               elif os.path.isdir(srcname):
                   copytree(srcname, dstname, symlinks)
               else:
                   copy2(srcname, dstname)
               # XXX What about devices, sockets etc.?
           except (IOError, os.error) as why:
               errors.append((srcname, dstname, str(why)))
           # catch the Error from the recursive copytree so that we can
           # continue with other files
           except Error as err:
               errors.extend(err.args[0])
       try:
           copystat(src, dst)
       except WindowsError:
           # can't copy file access times on Windows
           pass
       except OSError as why:
           errors.extend((src, dst, str(why)))
       if errors:
           raise Error(errors)

Another example that uses the :func:`ignore_patterns` helper::

   from shutil import copytree, ignore_patterns

   copytree(source, destination, ignore=ignore_patterns('*.pyc', 'tmp*'))

This will copy everything except ``.pyc`` files and files or directories whose
name starts with ``tmp``.

Another example that uses the *ignore* argument to add a logging call::

   from shutil import copytree
   import logging

   def _logpath(path, names):
       logging.info('Working in %s' % path)
       return []   # nothing will be ignored

   copytree(source, destination, ignore=_logpath)


.. _archiving-operations:

Archiving operations
--------------------

.. function:: make_archive(base_name, format, [root_dir, [base_dir, [verbose, [dry_run, [owner, [group, [logger]]]]]]])

   Create an archive file (such as zip or tar) and return its name.

   *base_name* is the name of the file to create, including the path, minus
   any format-specific extension. *format* is the archive format: one of
   "zip", "tar", "bztar" (if the :mod:`bz2` module is available) or "gztar".

   *root_dir* is a directory that will be the root directory of the
   archive; for example, we typically chdir into *root_dir* before creating the
   archive.

   *base_dir* is the directory where we start archiving from;
   i.e. *base_dir* will be the common prefix of all files and
   directories in the archive.

   *root_dir* and *base_dir* both default to the current directory.

   *owner* and *group* are used when creating a tar archive. By default,
   uses the current owner and group.

   *logger* is an instance of :class:`logging.Logger`.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: get_archive_formats()

   Returns a list of supported formats for archiving.
   Each element of the returned sequence is a tuple ``(name, description)``

   By default :mod:`shutil` provides these formats:

   - *gztar*: gzip'ed tar-file
   - *bztar*: bzip2'ed tar-file (if the :mod:`bz2` module is available.)
   - *tar*: uncompressed tar file
   - *zip*: ZIP file

   You can register new formats or provide your own archiver for any existing
   formats, by using :func:`register_archive_format`.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: register_archive_format(name, function, [extra_args, [description]])

   Registers an archiver for the format *name*. *function* is a callable that
   will be used to invoke the archiver.

   If given, *extra_args* is a sequence of ``(name, value)`` pairs that will be
   used as extra keywords arguments when the archiver callable is used.

   *description* is used by :func:`get_archive_formats` which returns the
   list of archivers. Defaults to an empty list.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: unregister_archive_format(name)

   Remove the archive format *name* from the list of supported formats.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: unpack_archive(filename[, extract_dir[, format]])

   Unpack an archive. *filename* is the full path of the archive.

   *extract_dir* is the name of the target directory where the archive is
   unpacked. If not provided, the current working directory is used.

   *format* is the archive format: one of "zip", "tar", or "gztar". Or any
   other format registered with :func:`register_unpack_format`. If not
   provided, :func:`unpack_archive` will use the archive file name extension
   and see if an unpacker was registered for that extension. In case none is
   found, a :exc:`ValueError` is raised.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: register_unpack_format(name, extensions, function[, extra_args[, description]])

   Registers an unpack format. *name* is the name of the format and
   *extensions* is a list of extensions corresponding to the format, like
   ``.zip`` for Zip files.

   *function* is the callable that will be used to unpack archives. The
   callable will receive the path of the archive, followed by the directory
   the archive must be extracted to.

   When provided, *extra_args* is a sequence of ``(name, value)`` tuples that
   will be passed as keywords arguments to the callable.

   *description* can be provided to describe the format, and will be returned
   by the :func:`get_unpack_formats` function.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: unregister_unpack_format(name)

   Unregister an unpack format. *name* is the name of the format.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2


.. function:: get_unpack_formats()

   Return a list of all registered formats for unpacking.
   Each element of the returned sequence is a tuple
   ``(name, extensions, description)``.

   By default :mod:`shutil` provides these formats:

   - *gztar*: gzip'ed tar-file
   - *bztar*: bzip2'ed tar-file (if the :mod:`bz2` module is available.)
   - *tar*: uncompressed tar file
   - *zip*: ZIP file

   You can register new formats or provide your own unpacker for any existing
   formats, by using :func:`register_unpack_format`.

   .. versionadded:: 3.2



Archiving example
:::::::::::::::::

In this example, we create a gzip'ed tar-file archive containing all files
found in the :file:`.ssh` directory of the user::

    >>> from shutil import make_archive
    >>> import os
    >>> archive_name = os.path.expanduser(os.path.join('~', 'myarchive'))
    >>> root_dir = os.path.expanduser(os.path.join('~', '.ssh'))
    >>> make_archive(archive_name, 'gztar', root_dir)
    '/Users/tarek/myarchive.tar.gz'

The resulting archive contains::

    $ tar -tzvf /Users/tarek/myarchive.tar.gz
    drwx------ tarek/staff       0 2010-02-01 16:23:40 ./
    -rw-r--r-- tarek/staff     609 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./authorized_keys
    -rwxr-xr-x tarek/staff      65 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./config
    -rwx------ tarek/staff     668 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_dsa
    -rwxr-xr-x tarek/staff     609 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_dsa.pub
    -rw------- tarek/staff    1675 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_rsa
    -rw-r--r-- tarek/staff     397 2008-06-09 13:26:54 ./id_rsa.pub
    -rw-r--r-- tarek/staff   37192 2010-02-06 18:23:10 ./known_hosts
